# DCC Analysis Summary files

Files here provide a unified summary of all genomic analysis results and their location on 
[CPTAC-DCC](https://cptc-xfer.uis.georgetown.edu/aspera/user/).

Note: not all CPTAC3 Year 2 analysis summaries are available yet.

# Format

DCC Analysis Summary files have the following columns:
```
 1. case
 2. disease
 3. pipeline_name
 4. pipeline_version
 5. timestamp
 6. DCC_path
 7. filesize
 8. file_format
 9. md5sum
```

Additional columns are specific to individual pipelines and will typically indicate the input data associated with this analysis.
Pipelines which generate multiple result files per case will have multiple entries in the analysis summary file.

# Workflows

Details about workflows and format of associated `DCC_analysis_aummary.dat` files.  Below are links and notes about state of
analysis summary files, which may not be complete.  Additional pipeline details are included in documentation included with
data files on DCC.

TODO: for each pipeline, provide:
* brief description of pipeline processing
    * link to GitHub and Processing Summary
    * data types used

## Methylation_Array

[CPTAC3 Methylation pipeline](https://github.com/ding-lab/cptac_methylation)

Analyses for 1321 samples across 1000 cases are available on DCC.  Analysis summary file `Methylation_Array.DCC_analysis_summary.dat` is incomplete.

## miRNA-Seq

`miRNA-Seq.DCC_analysis_summary.dat` has results on 1570 samples from 1064
CPTAC3 cases.  Each sample has results for mature_miRNA, precursor_miRNA, and
total_miRNA.  See [CPTAC3 miRNA-Seq pipeline documentation](https://github.com/ding-lab/CPTAC_miRNA) and processing
descriptions released with data on DCC for additional details.

## RNA-Seq

### RNA-Seq_Expression

1474 samples across 965 cases (consisting of all Y1 and Y2 cases) have been analyzed, as described in `RNA-Seq_Expression.DCC_analysis_summary.dat`

[CPTAC3 RNA-Seq Expression pipeline](https://github.com/ding-lab/cptac_rna_expression)

### RNA-Seq Fusion

1259 samples across 817 cases analyzed, including all of Y2 cases and LUAD from Y1.  Analysis summary `RNA-Seq_Fusion.DCC_analysis_summary.dat`
Earlier Y1 work from older v2.1 version of pipeline.  [RNA-Seq Fusion pipeline on GitHub](https://github.com/cuidaniel/Fusion_hg38)

### RNA-Seq Splicing + Transcript

995 cases analyzed and uploaded to DCC.  Analysis summary not complete

### RNA-Seq QC

706 cases analyzed and uploaded to DCC.  Analysis summary not complete

## WXS

### WXS MSI

381 cases analyzed and uploaded to DCC.  Analysis summary not complete

### WXS QC

643 cases analyzed and uploaded to DCC.  Analysis summary not complete

### WXS_Somatic_Variant

113 LSCC cases currently in `WXS_Somatic.DCC_analysis_summary.dat`.  Additional Y2 cases to be analyzed.

[TinDaisy somatic variant caller](https://github.com/ding-lab/TinDaisy)

### WXS_Somatic_Variant_SW

113 LSCC cases in `WXS_Somatic_Variant_SW.DCC_analysis_summary.dat`.  This is an ad hoc upload of calls generated by
[SomaticWrapper v1.5](https://github.com/ding-lab/somaticwrapper) and is provided for backwards compatiblity with 
prior SomaticWrapper calls.  `WXS_Somatic_Variant` pipeline above (based on TinDaisy) is expected to ultimately replace these calls.

### WXS_Adjacent_Somatic

229 cases analyzed and uploaded to DCC.  Additional analyses to be completed.  Analysis summary not complete

## WGS

### WGS QC

309 cases (confirm) analyzed and uploaded to DCC.  

85 LSCC cases currently in `QC.DCC_analysis_summary.dat`.  Additional Y2 cases to be added

[CPTAC3 QC pipeline](https://github.com/ding-lab/CPTAC3_QC)


## WGS_SV

309 (confirm) cases analyzed and uploaded to DCC.  

File `WGS_SV.DCC_analysis_summary.dat` has the following:
* 85 LSCC cases 
* 109 HNSCC cases aligned to a custom reference (`GRCh38_full_analysis_set_plus_decoy_hla`) by UMich group

Addititional Y2 cases to be added.


[CPTAC3 somatic_sv_workflow pipeline](https://github.com/ding-lab/somatic_sv_workflow)

## WGS_CNV_Somatic

309 CPTAC3 Year 2 cases in `WGS_CNV_Somatic.DCC_analysis_summary.dat`.

[DingLab BICSeq2 WGS CNV pipeline](https://github.com/ding-lab/BICSEQ2)


